release-v1.1 (#36)
ingonyama-zk/developer-docs: docs/icicle/primitives/msm.md

# MSM
# MSM - Multi scalar multiplication

MSM (Multi scalar multiplication) is an important primitive in ZK protocols.
MSM stands for Multi scalar multiplication, its defined as:

### Using MSM
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mi>M</mi>
  <mi>S</mi>
  <mi>M</mi>
  <mo stretchy="false">(</mo>
  <mi>a</mi>
  <mo>,</mo>
  <mi>G</mi>
  <mo stretchy="false">)</mo>
  <mo>=</mo>
  <munderover>
    <mo data-mjx-texclass="OP" movablelimits="false">&#x2211;</mo>
    <mrow data-mjx-texclass="ORD">
      <mi>j</mi>
      <mo>=</mo>
      <mn>0</mn>
    </mrow>
    <mrow data-mjx-texclass="ORD">
      <mi>n</mi>
      <mo>&#x2212;</mo>
      <mn>1</mn>
    </mrow>
  </munderover>
  <msub>
    <mi>a</mi>
    <mi>j</mi>
  </msub>
  <msub>
    <mi>G</mi>
    <mi>j</mi>
  </msub>
</math>

#### Supported algorithms
Where

Our MSM implementation supports two algorithms.
$G_j \in G$ - points from an Elliptic Curve group.

-   Bucket accumulation 

> -   Large triangle accumulation

Author: @DmytroTym Please verify my details on the `Large triangle accumulation` since im more familiar with the `Bucket accumulation` method

> Or in more simple terms MSM is the sum of scalar and EC point multiplications, we can learn from this definition as well that the core operations occurring are Modular Multiplication and Elliptic curve point addition. Since each multiplication can be computed independently and then the products need to be summed, this makes MSM inherently extremely parallelizable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In words, MSM is the sum of scalar and EC point multiplications. We can see from this definition that the core operations occurring are Modular Multiplication and Elliptic curve point addition. Each multiplication can be computed independently and then the products are summed, making MSM inherently parallelizable.
```

> Accelerating MSM is crucial to a ZK protocol performance due to the [large percent of run time](https://hackmd.io/@0xMonia/SkQ6-oRz3#Hardware-acceleration-in-action) they take up when generating proofs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accelerating MSM is crucial to a ZK protocol's performance due to the [large percent of run time](https://hackmd.io/@0xMonia/SkQ6-oRz3#Hardware-acceleration-in-action) they take when generating proofs.
```

> You can learn more about how MSMs work from this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bl5mQA7UL2I) and from this resource list on [Ingopedia](https://www.ingonyama.com/ingopedia/msm).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about how MSMs work from this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bl5mQA7UL2I) and from our resource list on [Ingopedia](https://www.ingonyama.com/ingopedia/msm).
```

# Using MSM

## Supported curves

> MSM supports all curves;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MSM supports the following curves:
```

`bls12-377`, `bls12-381`, `bn-254`, `bw6-761`

## Supported algorithms

Our MSM implementation supports two algorithms `Bucket accumulation` and `Large triangle accumulation`.

### Bucket accumulation

The Bucket Accumulation algorithm is a method of dividing the overall MSM task into smaller, more manageable sub-tasks. It involves partitioning scalars and their corresponding points into different "buckets" based on the scalar values.

> Bucket Accumulation can be more parallel-friendly because it involves dividing the computation into smaller, independent tasks, distributing scalar-point pairs into buckets and summing points within each bucket. This division makes it well-suited for parallel processing on GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bucket Accumulation can be more parallel-friendly because it involves dividing the computation into smaller, independent tasks, distributing scalar-point pairs into buckets and summing points within each bucket. This division makes it well suited for parallel processing on GPUs.
```

#### When should I use Bucket accumulation?

In scenarios involving large MSM computations with many scalar-point pairs, the ability to parallelize operations makes Bucket Accumulation more efficient. The larger the MSM task, the more significant the potential gains from parallelization.

### Large triangle accumulation

Large Triangle Accumulation is a method for optimizing MSM which focuses on reducing the number of point doublings in the computation. This algorithm is based on the observation that the number of point doublings can be minimized by structuring the computation in a specific manner.

#### When should I use Large triangle accumulation?

The Large Triangle Accumulation algorithm is more sequential in nature, as it builds upon each step sequentially (accumulating sums and then performing doubling). This structure can make it less suitable for parallelization but potentially more efficient for a <b>large batch of smaller MSM computations</b>.

> ### How do I toggle between the supported algorithms ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How do I toggle between the supported algorithms?
```

...
```

You may reference the rust code [here](https://github.com/ingonyama-zk/icicle/blob/77a7613aa21961030e4e12bf1c9a78a2dadb2518/wrappers/rust/icicle-core/src/msm/mod.rs#L54).

## MSM Modes

ICICLE MSM also supports two different modes `Batch MSM` and `Single MSM`

Batch MSM allows you to run many MSMs with a single API call, Single MSM will launch a single MSM computation.

> ### Which mode should I use ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Which mode should I use?
```

> This decision is highly dependent on your use case and design. However if your design allows for it using batch mode can significantly improve efficiency. Batch processing allows you to perform multiple MSM leveraging parallel processing capabilities of the GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This decision is highly dependent on your use case and design. However, if your design allows for it, using batch mode can significantly improve efficiency. Batch processing allows you to perform multiple MSMs leveraging the parallel processing capabilities of GPUs.
```

Single MSM mode should be used when batching isn't possible or when you have to run a single MSM.

### How do I toggle between MSM modes?

> You simply call `msm::msm`, if `msm_results` is a single result it will run in single MSM mode, if you are expecting many results MSM will run in batch mode, using the number of expected results in `msm_results` as the `batch_size`, the scalars and points will be split into groups based on `batch_size` and processed in parallel.

Reviewer: This should be reworded. Not sure exactly how but it doesn't read well

Author: @jeremyfelder please tell me what you think now.

...
```

You may reference the rust code [here](https://github.com/ingonyama-zk/icicle/blob/77a7613aa21961030e4e12bf1c9a78a2dadb2518/wrappers/rust/icicle-core/src/msm/mod.rs#L54).

## MSM Modes

ICICLE MSM also supports two different modes `Batch MSM` and `Single MSM`

Batch MSM allows you to run many MSMs with a single API call, Single MSM will launch a single MSM computation.

### Which mode should I use?

This decision is highly dependent on your use case and design. However, if your design allows for it, using batch mode can significantly improve efficiency. Batch processing allows you to perform multiple MSMs leveraging the parallel processing capabilities of GPUs.

Single MSM mode should be used when batching isn't possible or when you have to run a single MSM.

### How do I toggle between MSM modes?

> Toggling between MSM modes occurrences automatically, based on the number of results you are expecting from the `msm::msm` function. If you are expecting an array of `msm_results` ICICLE will automatically split `scalars` and `points` into equal parts and run them as multiple MSMs in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Toggling between MSM modes occurs automatically based on the number of results you are expecting from the `msm::msm` function. If you are expecting an array of `msm_results`, ICICLE will automatically split `scalars` and `points` into equal parts and run them as multiple MSMs in parallel.
```

```rust
...

let mut msm_result: HostOrDeviceSlice<'_, G1Projective> = HostOrDeviceSlice::cuda_malloc(1).unwrap();
msm::msm(&scalars, &points, &cfg, &mut msm_result).unwrap();

...
```

> In the example above we allocate a single expected result, the MSM method will interpret this as `batch_size=1` and run it as a single MSM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above we allocate a single expected result which the MSM method will interpret as `batch_size=1` and run a single MSM.
```

> In the next example we see that we are expecting 10 results, this would set `batch_size=10` and run 10 MSMs in batch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next example, we are expecting 10 results which sets `batch_size=10` and runs 10 MSMs in batch mode.
```
